Is this a correct understanding of who is involved in a fund?

* The general partner is the fund owner. They are more of the fund "operator." The economics of the fund they own are in the "Carry" or "Performance Fee" that is earned based on successful investing. They do though make decisions on behalf of the investors in the fund so they are "owners" in that way. Can this be more than 1 entity? Yes but it is usually one entity (LLC) that has multiple "Owners" or "General Partners."

* The limited partner is one of many investors in the fund. Correct, these people can be seen as the true "fund owners." They may also be entities such as trusts or even other GPs to your question above (please note that GPs are most often LLCs and that LPs may also be LLCs). The waterfall distribution practice ensures that the LP gets paid first, right? Yes, that is the "Hurdle Rate" or "Preferred Return"

When one partner takes a distribution do all partners take the same distribution?  Yes- some funds may allow distributions throughout the fund's life, and even if they do, some investors may choose to reinvest while others don't (in which would be a case where your above question would not be true). For this exercise, please assume all investors reinvest gains throughout both funds' lives and then all recieve the same proportionate distributions at the same time. This is a complicated feature customization we already have in Easefolio but are curious and excited to expand on- I LOVE that you ask this question.

It looks like within the context of a fund, in the way that it is discussed in the problem statement, that a a "share" of the fund is the same thing as a dollar bill. Another wonderful clarifying question, this is TRUE for open-ended funds (as seen in #2) but can also be true and usually is the case with close end funds (where $1=1 share). So when I, as a LP, have an initial investment of $10, then I "own" 10 shares of the fund. When the fund does well, then the value of my individual share is more that $1.  A poor fund the share value is less than a $1. YES  So if I take a distribution of $10, then I'm basically saying "cash me out of my 10 shares" and I will receive 10 times the value of a single share minus whatever fees are associated with that transaction. Technically, this happens proportionately across the fund (such as, instead of it being the gains and fees on top of the fund shares- which is a correct way to look at it but, what technically/mechanically happens is that the percentage of the fund that each investor owns- based usually on capital committed (investor deposits, so in this example each investor would be 1% of the fund) determines how much of each of their holdings is sold (including proportionate gains/fees). Now that I have zero shares in the fund, I can not take another distribution. Correct. If I have zero shares, then I am no longer an LP of the fund. Also correct, and more fantastic questions. As you brought up, the investor account value of course directly depends on the fund performance. Other than that- just please see the "proportionate distribution" comment as far as the distributions goes as this is a key point (much more complication in practice than in this exercise).


I think I'm getting a little confused about closed end private equity funds in which I buy in at the beginning but can not cash out until the fund has reached its end of life. This is unusual to a lot of people but commonplace for most asset placement above $100m. By this I mean that checks of those sizes actually prefer to be locked up for 7+ years- shocking on the surface but makes sense going deeper and I am happy to expand on this during our next call.


I'm not seeing difficult stuff in the problem statement.  For me its just a matter of making sure I understand the domain of discourse.


I cannot tell you how much I truly appreciate your clarifying questions.
